Add envoy Memcached rate limiting (#876)
kyma-project/istio: docs/contributor/draft/rate-limiting-poc/06-sum-up-rate-limiting.md

# Summary of Rate Limiting POC

Istio supports rate limiting by using EnvoyFilter configurations to handle the rate limiting in the Envoy proxies. This can be set to local or global rate limiting. Local rate limiting does not require communication with a rate limit service, and each Envoy instance acts independently. Global rate limiting requires gRPC communication with a rate limit service, for example [envoy ratelimit service](https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit).

Envoy ratelimit service needs to use redis or memcached backend.

# Memcached

> Memcached support is experimental, usage in production may not be recommended. It also has a key size limitation of 250 characters, therefore rate limiting based on client's certificate, or very long header values, is not possible. It cannot be considered as a viable option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memcached support is experimental, and using it in production is not recommended. It also has a key size limitation of 250 characters, so it's not possible to configure rate limiting based on the client's certificate or very long header values. Therefore, it cannot be considered a viable option.
```

# Redis

> Redis is considered stable, and is the recommended backend for rate limiting. Due to Redis licence we cannot deploy it in kyma cluster, and for now it's not possible (or very hard) to connect to BTP hyperscaler Redis instance from the Kyma cluster. We need to discuss the possibility of having redis managed by btp-operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redis is considered stable and is the recommended backend for rate limiting. Due to the Redis licence, we cannot deploy it in a Kyma cluster, and for now, it's not possible (or very hard) to connect the Redis instance to BTP hyperscaler from the Kyma cluster. We need to discuss the possibility of having Redis managed by SAP BTP Operator.
```

> Redis is considered stable, and is the recommended backend for rate limiting. Due to Redis licence we cannot deploy it in kyma cluster, and for now it's not possible (or very hard) to connect to BTP hyperscaler Redis instance from the Kyma cluster. We need to discuss the possibility of having redis managed by btp-operator.

Reviewer 2: `and for now it's not possible (or very hard) to connect to BTP hyperscaler Redis instance from the Kyma cluster.`
What does very hard mean?

# Valkey

> Valkey is a drop-in replacement for Redis, fully compatible with Envoys ratelimit service, considered stable, it does not have the key size limitation. It is also possible to deploy it in the Kyma cluster. Currently, it might be the only working option for rate limiting in Kyma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Valkey is a drop-in replacement for Redis that is fully compatible with Envoy rate limit service. It is considered stable and does not have a key size limitation. It is also possible to deploy it in the Kyma cluster. Currently, it might be the only working option for rate limiting in Kyma.
```

# Summary of Rate Limiting POC

Istio supports rate limiting by using EnvoyFilter configurations to handle the rate limiting in the Envoy proxies. This can be set to local or global rate limiting. Local rate limiting does not require communication with a rate limit service, and each Envoy instance acts independently. Global rate limiting requires gRPC communication with a rate limit service, for example [envoy ratelimit service](https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit).

Envoy rate limit service needs to use Redis or Memcached backend.

# Memcached

Pros:
- Mature project, used in production by many

> - Easy to deploy in Kyma cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Easy to deploy in a Kyma cluster
```

> - Easy to deploy in a Kyma cluster

Reviewer 2: Did we check the Memcached license? We should also add information about licensing.

> Cons:

Reviewer 2: Did we check if there is a managed BTP offering? If not I would also list this as a con, since this will increase operational effort.

Author: I just checked that, there is no memcached on BTP.

- Experimental support in Envoy

> - Key size limitation of 250 characters

Author: Value is the number of requests, I haven't checked that but I presume it's int32 or int64.

> - Key size limitation of 250 characters

Reviewer 2: 👍 I expect it to be at least the same capabilities for Redis and Memcached and rate limitting should be applied before hitting the limit. 😁

> - Rate limiting based on client's certificate, or very long header values, is not possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rate limiting based on the client's certificate or very long header values is not possible
```

# Redis

Pros:
- Mature and popular

> - Supported by Envoy

Reviewer 2: What does Supported By Envoy mean? Do you mean it's no Experimental feature? We should be more clear and detailed about all points and add reasoning.

> - Some know how within goat team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some know-how within the Goat team
```

> - Some know-how within the Goat team

Reviewer 2: I think I'd phrase it different.
```suggestion
- There are people in the Goat team who worked with Redis in the past
```

Cons:

> - Licence issues

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can add a bit more information, not everyone might be aware what those issues are.

> - [Hyperscaler Redis instance is not accessible from Kyma cluster](https://sap-btp.slack.com/archives/C01LGCBS196/p1718107858028479?thread_ts=1718018170.520259&cid=C01LGCBS196)

Reviewer 2: I would not add a Slack link, since this is also public documentation. I'd rather add a short information why we cannot use the Managed Redis service.

> - [Hyperscaler Redis instance is not accessible from Kyma cluster](https://sap-btp.slack.com/archives/C01LGCBS196/p1718107858028479?thread_ts=1718018170.520259&cid=C01LGCBS196)

Reviewer 2: I also see a con for managed Redis, that it is not available for OS Istio module and we would also need to find a way to use this. But this is more a general note about using a managed offering.

# Valkey

Pros:

> - Drop-in replacement for Redis

Reviewer 2: is this a pro? I'd rather add this as context for Valkey (maybe also with a link), for everyone who doesn't know about the Valkey project.

> - Fully compatible with Envoys ratelimit service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fully compatible with Envoy's rate limit service
```

> - Fully compatible with Envoy's rate limit service

Reviewer 2: How did you verify that? we should add this information.

> - Considered stable

Reviewer 2: Why is it considered stable?

> - Easy to deploy in Kyma cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Easy to deploy in a Kyma cluster
```

> - Easy to deploy in a Kyma cluster

Reviewer 2: Why is it easy to deploy?

Cons:

> - Not known in the goat team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Not known in the Goat team
```

> - Much less popular, and less mature than Redis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Much less popular and less mature than Redis
```

# Summary of Rate Limiting POC

Istio supports rate limiting by using EnvoyFilter configurations to handle the rate limiting in the Envoy proxies. This can be set to local or global rate limiting. Local rate limiting does not require communication with a rate limit service, and each Envoy instance acts independently. Global rate limiting requires gRPC communication with a rate limit service. Envoy provides a [reference implementation](https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit) written in Go. The Envoy rate limit service reference implementation needs to use Redis or Memcached backend.

> Additional info about Envoy rate limit service usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional information about Envoy rate limit service usage:
```

The rate limit service had last release over four years ago, but it is still maintained and built on the main branch.

All the backends listed here are easy to deploy using Helm charts. 

# Memcached

Pros:
- Mature project, used in production by many
- Fully open source, no licensing issues
Cons:
- Only experimental support in [Envoy rate limit service implementation](https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit?tab=readme-ov-file#memcache), no further information available
- Descriptor key size limitation of 250 characters
- Rate limiting based on the client's certificate or very long header values is not possible

# Redis
Redis is offered in BTP as a service, making it best option for our needs. Unfortunately it is not accessible from the Kyma cluster.

Pros:
- Mature and popular
- Supported by Envoy rate limit service implementation
- There are people in the Goat team who worked with Redis in the past
Cons:
- License prevents us from offering it as a service in Kyma
- Hyperscaler Redis instance is not accessible from Kyma cluster, it is only available within Cloud Foundry environment

> - If we choose managed Redis offering, it will not be available for OS Istio module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If we choose the managed Redis offering, it will not be available for the open-source Istio module
```
